INTRODUCTION
Stars born in the same gas cloud are remarkable laboratories to
study stellar and Galactic astrophysics because such objects share the
same age and chemical composition. Therefore, any differences in
chemical composition between two stars that formed together could
★ This paper includes data gathered with the 6.5 m Magellan Telescopes
located at Las Campanas Observatory, Chile. Some of the data presented
herein were obtained at the W. M. Keck Observatory, which is operated as a
scientific partnership among the California Institute of Technology, the University of California and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The Observatory was made possible by the generous financial support of the
W. M. Keck Foundation. Based on observations collected at the European
Southern Observatory under ESO programme 108.22EC.001.
† E-mail: david.yong@anu.edu.au
arise due to (i) limitations and/or systematics in the analysis and/or
(ii) astrophysical processes.
Regarding the former, binary stars are incredibly powerful objects
to aid in the calibration and validation of stellar chemical compositions from large-scale spectroscopic surveys such as Gaia-ESO
(Gilmore et al. 2012), GALAH (De Silva et al. 2015), APOGEE
(Majewski et al. 2017), SDSS-V (Kollmeier et al. 2017) and 4MOST
(de Jong et al. 2019). In this context, calibrations of stellar chemical compositions have relied upon stars in clusters and the 34 Gaia
FGK “benchmark” stars (Jofré et al. 2014, 2015, 2017; Heiter et al.
2015). There are a number of significant advantages for using binary
stars1 to calibrate and/or validate stellar chemical compositions from spectroscopic surveys: (1) they are much more abundant than star
clusters and the 34 Gaia FGK “benchmark” stars; (2) they cover a
larger range of parameter space (temperature, mass, metallicity, age,
location etc.); (3) they populate the parameter space more densely.
Any new avenue to improve the calibration of stellar chemical abundances from large surveys would be profoundly important.
Various astrophysical processes can produce differences in the
chemical composition between two stars in a binary system. Those
chemical abundance differences, however, can be subtle and difficult
to detect. These processes include:
(i) Exoplanet formation and/or engulfment. If one of the stars in
the binary system has engulfed a planet, this will imprint a predictable
chemical abundance signature onto the host star (Chambers 2010),
and may therefore induce differences in abundances within a binary system (Tucci Maia et al. 2014; Ramírez et al. 2015; Saffe et al.
2017; Oh et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018; Ramírez et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2021; Spina et al. 2021). Similarly, the formation of terrestrial planets may “remove” refractory element material from the host star (e.g.,
Meléndez et al. 2009; Bitsch et al. 2018) leading to an apparent depletion of such elements within a binary system.
(ii) Stellar astrophysics. Atomic diffusion is a generic term used to
describe a variety of mixing processes in the atmospheres of stars that
can affect the apparent chemical composition of the star as a function
of stellar evolution, i.e., stellar age and mass (e.g., Korn et al. 2007;
Nordlander et al. 2012; Dotter et al. 2017). For some conatal systems
such as open clusters and binary star systems, atomic diffusion can
induce small but detectable abundance differences (Souto et al. 2018,
2019; Liu et al. 2019).
(iii) Star formation and the interstellar medium. The chemical
homogeneity of gas within a star forming cluster depends upon how
the interstellar medium operates and mixes gas (Feng & Krumholz
2014; Krumholz & Ting 2018). By studying binary star systems with
different spatial and velocity separations, we can essentially study
the chemical homogeneity of the natal gas clouds at different spatial
separations (Kamdar et al. 2019).
(iv) Dust evolution and accretion. Hoppe et al. (2020) examined
how the growth and drift of dust particles in the protoplanetary disc
can influence the abundances of stars. Since the pebbles drift faster
than the gas (e.g., Brauer et al. 2008), the heavy elements are accreted
before the main gas leading to an enrichment of the star.
High precision chemical abundances for a large sample of binary stars can, in principle, allow us to distinguish between these
different astrophysical processes. In particular, pairs of stars with a
range of differences in effective temperature, surface gravity, spatial separation and 3D velocity separation are needed to probe the
above-mentioned processes. Motivated by these science questions,
obtaining and analysing such a sample is the goal of this work.
While the importance of binary stars has long-been recognised,
the number of known binary stars that are sufficiently bright to enable high-precision chemical abundance analysis is small. At the
time we embarked upon this study, to our knowledge only ∼10 binary star systems had high-precision (relative abundance errors of
the order ∼0.01 dex; ∼2%) chemical abundance examinations (see
Behmard et al. 2023 and references therein). Those small numbers
were due to (1) the lack of known binary stars and (2) random target selection in spectroscopic surveys; most surveys did not target
both stars in a binary system nor do they routinely deliver (relative)
have not interacted and whose evolution can be treated as single-star evolution
from a modeling perspective.
abundance precision at the ∼0.01 dex level which was necessary to
detect stellar chemical signatures of terrestrial planet formation. We
also note that the planet engulfment hypothesis remains somewhat
contentious and that subtle variations in abundance ratios [X/Fe]
with stellar age can affect the interpretation (Nissen 2015). Therefore, conatal stars will enable a more robust identification of planet
engulfment signatures.
Before Gaia (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016), it was a major challenge to (1) reliably identify binaries with wide separations and (2)
distinguish binaries from chance alignments of stars at different distances. Using Gaia EDR3, El-Badry et al. (2021) provided a sample
of 1 million binary star systems and the vast majority have sufficiently large separations and (presumably) orbital periods such that
they do not interact and most “can in some sense be viewed as clusters of two: the components formed from the same gas cloud and
have orbited one another ever since”. For simplicity, we will refer to
both the bound binary and unbound co-moving systems simply as
“co-moving pairs” of stars.
While El-Badry et al. (2021) probed binary stars with separations
up to 1 pc, the simulations by Kamdar et al. (2019) predicted that
co-moving pairs of stars with significantly larger spatial separations
(up to 20 pc; ∼4 × 106 AU) and 3D velocity separations < 1.5
km s−1 are conatal, i.e., born from the same gas cloud. If correct,
then this would greatly increase the population of co-moving stars
for high-resolution spectroscopic studies. Indeed our pilot study of
31 co-moving pairs (Nelson et al. 2021) confirmed that 73 ± 22% of
widely separated (105 - 107 AU) co-moving pairs of stars with 3D
velocity differences < 2 km s−1 are chemically homogeneous and
thus presumably conatal.
Motivated by the 1 million binary star sample of El-Badry et al.
(2021), we generated our own catalogue of co-moving pairs of stars
with spatial separations as large as 30 pc following the approach
of Nelson et al. (2021). Our expectation was that such a catalogue
would include a significant number of sufficiently bright conatal comoving pairs of stars from which we can obtain high-resolution,
high signal-to-noise ratio spectra and thereby deliver high-precision
chemical abundance measurements.
Using the differential analysis techniques pioneered by
Meléndez et al. (2009) and refined by Liu et al. (2014) and
Ramírez et al. (2014), our goal is to obtain high precision relative
chemical abundance measurements of a large sample of co-moving
pairs of stars with internal errors as low as 0.01 dex (∼2%); a factor of
five improvement over traditional techniques (Nissen & Gustafsson
2018). Such high precision relative chemical abundance measurements are beyond the limit of any ongoing or planned large-scale
spectroscopic surveys, yet essential for the main aims of this study.
Those goals are to detect the subtle signatures of chemical inhomogeneity in the star forming clouds which could then be attributed to
atomic diffusion, planet engulfment and/or other processes.
The goal of this paper is to introduce the sample selection, observations, analysis and first results of C3PO; towards a Complete
Census of Co-moving Pairs Of stars. The paper is arranged as follows. In Section 2 we describe the sample selection, observations
and data reduction. In Section 3 we present the analysis focusing on
the spectroscopically-determined stellar parameters and metallicity,
[Fe/H] (other elements will be presented in a future work). Section
4 includes our results. Our discussion and conclusions are given in
Sections 5 and 6, respectively.