INTRODUCTION Stars born in the same gas cloud are remarkable laboratories to study stellar and Galactic astrophysics because such objects share the same age and chemical composition.
Therefore... any differences in chemical composition between two stars that formed together could ★ This paper includes data gathered with the 6.5 m Magellan Telescopes located at Las Campanas Observatory... Chile.
Some of the data presented herein were obtained at the W. M. Keck Observatory... which is operated as a scientific partnership among the California Institute of Technology... the University of California and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The Observatory was made possible by the generous financial support of the W. M. Keck Foundation.
Based on observations collected at the European Southern Observatory under ESO programme 108.22EC.001. † E-mail: david.yong@anu.edu.au arise due to  limitations and/or systematics in the analysis and/or  astrophysical processes.
Regarding the former... binary stars are incredibly powerful objects to aid in the calibration and validation of stellar chemical compositions from large-scale spectroscopic surveys such as Gaia-ESO ... GALAH ... APOGEE ... SDSS-V  and 4MOST . In this context... calibrations of stellar chemical compositions have relied upon stars in clusters and the 34 Gaia FGK “benchmark” stars . There are a number of significant advantages for using binary stars1 to calibrate and/or validate stellar chemical compositions from spectroscopic surveys:  they are much more abundant than star clusters and the 34 Gaia FGK “benchmark” stars;  they cover a larger range of parameter space ;  they populate the parameter space more densely.
Any new avenue to improve the calibration of stellar chemical abundances from large surveys would be profoundly important.
Various astrophysical processes can produce differences in the chemical composition between two stars in a binary system.
Those chemical abundance differences... however... can be subtle and difficult to detect.
These processes include:  Exoplanet formation and/or engulfment.
If one of the stars in the binary system has engulfed a planet... this will imprint a predictable chemical abundance signature onto the host star ... and may therefore induce differences in abundances within a binary system . Similarly... the formation of terrestrial planets may “remove” refractory element material from the host star  leading to an apparent depletion of such elements within a binary system.  Stellar astrophysics.
Atomic diffusion is a generic term used to describe a variety of mixing processes in the atmospheres of stars that can affect the apparent chemical composition of the star as a function of stellar evolution... i.e.... stellar age and mass . For some conatal systems such as open clusters and binary star systems... atomic diffusion can induce small but detectable abundance differences .  Star formation and the interstellar medium.
The chemical homogeneity of gas within a star forming cluster depends upon how the interstellar medium operates and mixes gas . By studying binary star systems with different spatial and velocity separations... we can essentially study the chemical homogeneity of the natal gas clouds at different spatial separations .  Dust evolution and accretion.
Hoppe et al.  examined how the growth and drift of dust particles in the protoplanetary disc can influence the abundances of stars.
Since the pebbles drift faster than the gas ... the heavy elements are accreted before the main gas leading to an enrichment of the star.
High precision chemical abundances for a large sample of binary stars can... in principle... allow us to distinguish between these different astrophysical processes.
In particular... pairs of stars with a range of differences in effective temperature... surface gravity... spatial separation and 3D velocity separation are needed to probe the above-mentioned processes.
Motivated by these science questions... obtaining and analysing such a sample is the goal of this work.
While the importance of binary stars has long-been recognised... the number of known binary stars that are sufficiently bright to enable high-precision chemical abundance analysis is small.
At the time we embarked upon this study... to our knowledge only ∼10 binary star systems had high-precision  chemical abundance examinations . Those small numbers were due to  the lack of known binary stars and  random target selection in spectroscopic surveys; most surveys did not target both stars in a binary system nor do they routinely deliver  have not interacted and whose evolution can be treated as single-star evolution from a modeling perspective. abundance precision at the ∼0.01 dex level which was necessary to detect stellar chemical signatures of terrestrial planet formation.
We also note that the planet engulfment hypothesis remains somewhat contentious and that subtle variations in abundance ratios [X/Fe] with stellar age can affect the interpretation . Therefore... conatal stars will enable a more robust identification of planet engulfment signatures.
Before Gaia ... it was a major challenge to  reliably identify binaries with wide separations and  distinguish binaries from chance alignments of stars at different distances.
Using Gaia EDR3... El-Badry et al.  provided a sample of 1 million binary star systems and the vast majority have sufficiently large separations and  orbital periods such that they do not interact and most “can in some sense be viewed as clusters of two: the components formed from the same gas cloud and have orbited one another ever since”. For simplicity... we will refer to both the bound binary and unbound co-moving systems simply as “co-moving pairs” of stars.
While El-Badry et al.  probed binary stars with separations up to 1 pc... the simulations by Kamdar et al.  predicted that co-moving pairs of stars with significantly larger spatial separations  and 3D velocity separations < 1.5 km s−1 are conatal... i.e.... born from the same gas cloud.
If correct... then this would greatly increase the population of co-moving stars for high-resolution spectroscopic studies.
Indeed our pilot study of 31 co-moving pairs  confirmed that 73 ± 22% of widely separated  co-moving pairs of stars with 3D velocity differences < 2 km s−1 are chemically homogeneous and thus presumably conatal.
Motivated by the 1 million binary star sample of El-Badry et al. ... we generated our own catalogue of co-moving pairs of stars with spatial separations as large as 30 pc following the approach of Nelson et al. . Our expectation was that such a catalogue would include a significant number of sufficiently bright conatal comoving pairs of stars from which we can obtain high-resolution... high signal-to-noise ratio spectra and thereby deliver high-precision chemical abundance measurements.
Using the differential analysis techniques pioneered by Meléndez et al.  and refined by Liu et al.  and Ramírez et al. ... our goal is to obtain high precision relative chemical abundance measurements of a large sample of co-moving pairs of stars with internal errors as low as 0.01 dex ; a factor of five improvement over traditional techniques . Such high precision relative chemical abundance measurements are beyond the limit of any ongoing or planned large-scale spectroscopic surveys... yet essential for the main aims of this study.
Those goals are to detect the subtle signatures of chemical inhomogeneity in the star forming clouds which could then be attributed to atomic diffusion... planet engulfment and/or other processes.
The goal of this paper is to introduce the sample selection... observations... analysis and first results of C3PO; towards a Complete Census of Co-moving Pairs Of stars.
The paper is arranged as follows.
In Section 2 we describe the sample selection... observations and data reduction.
In Section 3 we present the analysis focusing on the spectroscopically-determined stellar parameters and metallicity... [Fe/H] . Section 4 includes our results.
